# Publications

- **Regular widespread aggregations of the oceanic jellyfish Pelagia noctiluca in the northeast Atlantic over 11 years**  
  A.P. Long and T. Bastian and D. Haberlin and D. Stokes and O. Lyashevska and D. Brophy and C. Lawton and T.K. Doyle (2024). _Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science_. [DOI](https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecss.2024.108805)

  > The jellyfish Pelagia noctiluca form extensive aggregations in the Mediterranean Sea that can exert top-down control on prey and cause mass-mortalities in fish farms. The description of extensive aggregations of P. noctiluca in the northeast Atlantic in 2007 coupled with a subsequent mortality event of farmed salmon in Northern Ireland prompted further investigation of the species in this region. We collected standardised P. noctiluca biomass from 1938 fisheries trawls over 11 years (2008–2018) covering ∼200,000 km2 of northeast Atlantic shelf seas. While a linear trend in P. noctiluca was not identified, the mean annual biomass exhibited significant fluctuations, with particularly elevated levels in 2009, 2013, 2014 and 2016 (0.05, 0.02, 0.01 and 0.02 kg ha−1, respectively). Mean biomass was higher in the northern (0.028 kg ha−1) and western portions (0.005 kg ha−1) of the study area compared to the southwestern (0.003 kg ha−1) and southeastern portions (0.001 kg ha−1). A binomial generalised linear mixed model of P. noctiluca biomass data indicated that higher P. noctiluca occurrence was driven by a positive Eastern Atlantic Pattern index (strongest effect), south-easterly winds, a negative North Atlantic Oscillation index and lower sea-surface temperatures (weakest effect). The fixed effects accounted for 36.81% of the variance in P. noctiluca occurrence data, while a random year effect further explained an additional 24.06% of the variance. These conditions may destabilise the European Slope Current in autumn-winter which promotes the transport of P. noctiluca from oceanic sources onto the northeast Atlantic shelf. Our findings represent a dramatic shift in our understanding of this species in the northeast Atlantic which may have significant ecological impacts, from predation on fish eggs and larvae to providing food for oceanic sunfish.

- **Evaluation of a marine mammal status and trends contaminants indicator for European waters**  
  Rosie S. Williams and Andrew Brownlow and Andrew Baillie and Jonathan L. Barber and James Barnett and Nicholas J. Davison and Robert Deaville and Mariel {ten Doeschate} and Rod Penrose and Matthew Perkins and Ruth Williams and Paul D. Jepson and Olga Lyashevska and Sinéad Murphy (2023). _Science of The Total Environment_. [DOI](https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.161301)

  > Marine mammals are vulnerable to the bioaccumulation, biomagnification and lactational transfer of specific types of pollutants, such as industrial polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), due to their long-life spans, feeding at a high trophic level and unique fat stores that can serve as depots for these lipophilic contaminants. Currently, European countries are developing indicators for monitoring pollutants in the marine environment and assessing the state of biodiversity, requirements under both Regional Seas Conventions and European legislation. As sentinel species for marine ecosystem and human health, marine mammals can be employed to assess bioaccumulated contaminants otherwise below current analytical detection limits in water and lower trophic level marine biota. To aid the development of Regional Seas marine mammal contaminants indicators, as well as Member States obligations under descriptor 8 of the EU Marine Strategy Framework Directive, the current study aims to further develop appropriate methodological standards using data collected by the established UK marine mammal pollutant monitoring programme (1990 to 2017) to assess the trends and status of PCBs in harbour porpoises. Within this case study, temporal trends of PCB blubber concentration in juvenile harbour porpoises were analysed using multiple linear regression models and toxicity thresholds for the onset of physiological (reproductive and immunological) endpoints were applied to all sex-maturity groups. Mean PCB blubber concentrations were observed to decline in all harbour porpoise Assessment Units and OSPAR Assessment Areas in UK waters. However, a high proportion of animals were exposed to concentrations deemed to be a toxicological threat, though the relative proportion declined in most Assessment Units/Areas over the last 10 years of the assessment. Recommendations were made for improving the quality of the assessment going forward, including detailing monitoring requirements for the successful implementation of such an indicator.

- **Long-term trends in herring growth primarily linked to temperature by gradient boosting regression trees**  
  Olga Lyashevska and Clementine Harma and Cóilín Minto and Maurice Clarke and Deirdre Brophy (2020). _Ecological Informatics_. [DOI](https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoinf.2020.101154)

  > Environmental change and fishing activity can produce directional trends in exploited fish populations with consequences for stock productivity. For herring in the Celtic Sea, size at age has been in steady decline since the mid 1980's. In the neighbouring herring stock off the Northwest coast of Ireland, reductions in size at age are noted after 1990. Here, gradient boosting regression trees were used to investigate trends in extended time series (1959–2012) of length-at-age across both populations and to identify important variables associated with the observed declines in size. The predominant signal detected was a non-linear negative relationship between adult size and mean Sea Surface Temperature during the first growing season. Herring length was negatively correlated with the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation. Weaker associations with indicators of food availability and population size were also detected. Across both populations a marked decline in length was observed at the upper end of the temperature range (~14∘C in the Celtic Sea and ~13∘C in the Northwest). Declines in length and associations with temperature were more pronounced in the Celtic Sea population which may be vulnerable to increasing sea temperatures due to its position at the southern limit of the species distribution.

- **Microplastics in sub-surface waters of the Arctic Central Basin **  
  La Daana K. Kanhai and Katarina Gårdfeldt and Olga Lyashevska and Martin Hassellöv and Richard C. Thompson and Ian O'Connor (2018). _Marine Pollution Bulletin _. [DOI](https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2018.03.011)

  > Abstract Polar oceans, though remote in location, are not immune to the accumulation of plastic debris. The present study, investigated for the first time, the abundance, distribution and composition of microplastics in sub-surface waters of the Arctic Central Basin. Microplastic sampling was carried out using the bow water system of icebreaker Oden (single depth: 8.5 m) and \{CTD\} rosette sampler (multiple depths: 8–4369 m). Potential microplastics were isolated and analysed using Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR). Bow water sampling revealed that the median microplastic abundance in near surface waters of the Polar Mixed Layer (PML) was 0.7 particles m−3. Regarding the vertical distribution of microplastics in the ACB, microplastic abundance (particles m−3) in the different water masses was as follows: Polar Mixed Layer (0–375) &gt; Deep and bottom waters (0–104) &gt; Atlantic water (0–95) &gt; Halocline i.e. Atlantic or Pacific (0–83).

- **Presence of persistent organic pollutants in a breeding common tern (Sterna hirundo) population in Ireland**  
  Acampora, Heidi and White, Philip and Lyashevska, Olga and O'Connor, Ian (2017). _Environmental Science and Pollution Research_. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-017-8931-7)

  > Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are chemical compounds of environmental concern due to their toxic, persistent nature and their ability to bio-accumulate in biological tissue. Seabirds, for often being at the top of the food web, have been used as monitors of environmental pollutants. Adverse effects caused by POPs have been reported in common terns (Sterna hirundo) since the 1970s. Egg shell thinning, embryo and hatchling deformities have been reported for this species. Environmental legislation, such as the Oslo-Paris Convention (OSPAR), has agreed on the monitoring of concentration of POPs in common terns. This study set out to investigate contemporary concentrations of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), organochlorine pesticides (OCPs) and brominated flame retardants (BFRs) in common terns breeding in Ireland, along with congener profiles. Investigation was conducted in live (n = 15) and dead birds (n = 20) to test for the efficiency of different methodologies using preen oil and feathers versus liver and preen gland. Mean concentrations of POPs followed the order: PCB (36.48 ng/g ww feather) > PAH (30.01 ng/g ww feather) > OCP (13.36 ng/g ww feather) > BFR (1.98 ng/g ww feather) in live birds; and PAH (46.65 ng/g ww preen gland) > PCB (44.11 ng/g ww preen gland) > OCP (15.15 ng/g ww liver) > BFR (5.07 ng/g ww liver) in dead birds. Comparison of contaminant results with toxicity pre-established levels concluded that this population of common terns in Ireland is not at risk of anomalies caused by POPs. However, some levels are higher in comparison to the ones established by OSPAR's EcoQO and must be monitored periodically.

- **Mapping species abundance by a spatial zero-inflated Poisson model: a case study in the Wadden Sea, the Netherlands**  
  Lyashevska, Olga and Brus, Dick J. and van der Meer, Jaap (2016). _Ecology and Evolution_. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.1880)

- **Grid-spacing and the quality of abundance maps for species that show spatial autocorrelation and zero-inflation **  
  Olga Lyashevska and Dick J. Brus and Jaap van der Meer (2016). _Spatial Statistics _. [DOI](https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.spasta.2016.08.001)

  > Abstract The effect of grid-spacing on the quality of species abundance maps is explored for species that show zero-inflation and spatial autocorrelation. Using a zero-inflated Poisson mixture model multiple fields of the prevalence parameter π and the intensity parameter μ were simulated. A selected field was sampled by grid-sampling with 200, 400, 800, 1600, and 3200 m grid-spacing and used to predict at a fixed set of validation locations by simple kriging with an external drift. The external drift variables were silt, silt squared and altitude. The estimated sampling distribution of \{MSE\} against grid-spacing shows that beyond a spacing of 1600 m the mean of \{MSE\} increases at a much faster rate. Based on these findings the 1600 m grid which consists of 446 locations for our study area of 2400 km2 gives a compromise between sampling costs and prediction accuracy.

- **The use of beached bird surveys for marine plastic litter monitoring in Ireland **  
  Heidi Acampora and Olga Lyashevska and Jan Andries Van Franeker and Ian O'Connor (2016). _Marine Environmental Research _. [DOI](https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.marenvres.2016.08.002)

  > Abstract Marine plastic litter has become a major threat to wildlife. Marine animals are highly susceptible to entanglement and ingestion of debris at sea. Governments all around the world are being urged to monitor litter sources and inputs, and to mitigate the impacts of marine litter, which is primarily composed of plastics. European policies, such as Oslo-Paris Convention (OSPAR) and Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD) have adopted the monitoring of a seabird species, the Northern Fulmar (Fulmarus glacialis), as an environmental quality indicator through the analysis of stomach contents of beached Fulmar specimens. The aims of this research were to: firstly set a baseline investigation of multispecies of seabirds in Ireland affected by the ingestion of litter and, secondly to investigate the feasibility of using Fulmar and/or other potential species of seabird as an indicator for marine debris in Ireland through beached bird surveys. Within 30 months, 121 birds comprising 16 different species were collected and examined for the presence of litter. Of these, 27.3% (n = 33) comprising 12 different species were found to ingest litter, mainly plastics. The average mass of ingested litter was 0.141 g. Among 14 sampled Northern Fulmars, 13 (93%) had ingested plastic litter, all of them over the 0.1 g threshold used in \{OSPAR\} and \{MSFD\} policy target definitions. Results show that seabirds in Ireland are ingesting marine litter, as in many other countries in the world. Monitoring seabird litter ingestion has the potential to form part of a wider marine litter monitoring programme that can help to inform mitigation and management measures for marine litter.

- **Microplastic abundance, distribution and composition along a latitudinal gradient in the Atlantic Ocean **  
  La Daana K. Kanhai and Rick Officer and Olga Lyashevska and Richard C. Thompson and Ian O'Connor (2016). _Marine Pollution Bulletin _. [DOI](https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2016.12.025)

  > Abstract Microplastics in the world's oceans are a global concern due to the potential threat they pose to marine organisms. This study investigated microplastic abundance, distribution and composition in the Atlantic Ocean on a transect from the Bay of Biscay to Cape Town, South Africa. Microplastics were sampled from sub-surface waters using the underway system of the \{RV\} Polarstern. Potential microplastics were isolated from samples and FT-IR spectroscopy was used to identify polymer types. Of the particles analysed, 63% were rayon and 37% were synthetic polymers. The majority of microplastics were identified as polyesters (49%) and blends of polyamide or acrylic/polyester (43%). Overall, fibres (94%) were predominant. Average microplastic abundance in the Atlantic Ocean was 1.15 ± 1.45 particles m− 3. Of the 76 samples, 14 were from the Benguela upwelling and there was no statistically significant difference in microplastic abundance between upwelled and non-upwelled sites.

- **How many dimensions of biodiversity do we need? **  
  Olga Lyashevska and Keith D. Farnsworth (2012). _Ecological Indicators _. [DOI](https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2011.12.016)

  > Biodiversity is a measure of the total difference within a biological system. It is understood to arise at genetic, species and multiple levels of community organisation, hence is multidimensional in nature. Biodiversity indices have proliferated in attempts to capture this complexity but may now have confounded it. Here we attempt a reduction to the minimal set of metrics needed to describe biodiversity (often by default taken to be species richness). 1000 model communities with realistic taxonomic composition were synthesised using databases of marine benthic species. A battery of 19 biodiversity indices were calculated for every community and analysed by \{PCA\} to show inter-dependence and sensitivity to variation in taxonomic (a surrogate for genetic), functional (based on ecological roles) and structural (based on species abundance) diversity. We found the three major axes of biodiversity were (a) structural complexity, and (b) two different mixtures of taxonomic and functional diversity: it was well approximated by a three-dimensional space of these variables. A scalar distance from the origin of this space could serve as a single valued summary where needed, for example in economic valuations. The most widely used single biodiversity measure – species richness – missed 88.6% of the diversity, emphasising the importance of additional characters and the need for species databases to record functional traits, presence and abundance in communities, and phylogenetic information.

- **Functional complexity: The source of value in biodiversity **  
  Keith D. Farnsworth and Olga Lyashevska and Tak Fung (2012). _Ecological Complexity _. [DOI](https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecocom.2012.02.001)

  > Biodiversity may be seen as a scientific measure of the complexity of a biological system, implying an information basis. Complexity cannot be directly valued, so economists have tried to define the services it provides, though often just valuing the services of ‘key’ species. Here we provide a new definition of biodiversity as a measure of functional information, arguing that complexity embodies meaningful information as Gregory Bateson defined it. We argue that functional information content (FIC) is the potentially valuable component of total (algorithmic) information content (AIC), as it alone determines biological fitness and supports ecosystem services. Inspired by recent extensions to the Noah's Ark problem, we show how FIC/AIC can be calculated to measure the degree of substitutability within an ecological community. Establishing substitutability is an essential foundation for valuation. From it, we derive a way to rank whole communities by Indirect Use Value, through quantifying the relation between system complexity and the production rate of ecosystem services. Understanding biodiversity as information evidently serves as a practical interface between economics and ecological science.

- **Class imbalance in gradient boosting classification algorithms: Application to experimental stroke data**  
  Olga Lyashevska and Fiona Malone and Eugene MacCarthy and Jens Fiehler and Jan-Hendrik Buhk and Liam Morris (0). _Statistical Methods in Medical Research_. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1177/0962280220980484)

  > Imbalance between positive and negative outcomes, a so-called class imbalance, is a problem generally found in medical data. Imbalanced data hinder the performance of conventional classification methods which aim to improve the overall accuracy of the model without accounting for uneven distribution of the classes. To rectify this, the data can be resampled by oversampling the positive (minority) class until the classes are approximately equally represented. After that, a prediction model such as gradient boosting algorithm can be fitted with greater confidence. This classification method allows for non-linear relationships and deep interactive effects while focusing on difficult areas by iterative shifting towards problematic observations. In this study, we demonstrate application of these methods to medical data and develop a practical framework for evaluation of features contributing into the probability of stroke.

